And I also said that I don't know what happened. I
heard later that they got 10 or 15 years and the guy
that used the machine gun
once again didn't know what he was doing. He was
high on drugs so he wasn't responsible for his
actions. They had some good civil liberties union
people in Bung Tao as GI lawyers. I know every one of
them must have been a card-carrying member.
What they should have done is thrown him out of the
helicopter when they took him down. Did that go on?
You know, I never did see anything like that. Did
you ever hear anything like that? When I went to
Pleiku in 1970,
there was a big operation going on close to the
Cambodian border. And this was down close to a
place called the Oasis. There was a tank battalion
there. An NVA regiment had assaulted this tank
battalion. It was a tank company that was in
defensive positions at the Oasis, which was an
engineer base
over on Highway 19. And you can see the Chinooks.
It's a big helicopter. It looks like a banana.
Coming back, and they had cargo nets slung on the
bottom part of them. And you just looked like they
were carrying regular cargo until they got real
close to you. And then you could see the arms and
legs sticking out of the cargo. But they were
bringing about bodies. And then they'd put them in
body bags and ship them home. They had a major
battle someplace. But that's the only time that
I'd seen anything like that. I had heard that...
You know, sometimes when they were doing some
interrogation work, that they'd carry a guy up in
the helicopter, two guys up in the helicopter,
throw one out and get the other to talk. I never saw
anything like that. It's hard for me to comprehend
that American soldiers would do something like
that. I guess it would be a good way to get a guy to
talk to them.
But there were a lot of things that went on at the
South Vietnamese
to get people to talk. I can tell you that if you take
a silk scarf and you tie the guy down and you put the
silk scarf over his face just to where it comes down
and touches his nose and his mouth, if you pour
water all over that silk scarf on the top of it to
where it comes down and lays across the guy's face,
it makes him think that he's suffocating and he
can't breathe.
Captured
a guy one time that was a tax collector. And since
I'd already been in Vietnam a year and a half, I knew
that if I turned him over to the Army or the American
forces, that the guy would be back out there in the
next three or four weeks collecting his taxes
again. So I took him to a unit called the Mike Force.
Now, this Mike Force had... little bit of Chinese.
Well, to give you an idea of their company
commander was an Australian. They had three or
four Special Forces guys with them. They had some
Australian Special Forces people. And then all
their basic soldiers were Chinese privates. Now
these guys could take a magazine with 20 rounds in
it and 16 and go anywhere in South Vietnam and
nobody messed with them. They were that bad. And I
took this guy down there. And I gave him about
40,000 answers. And I said, this man must be a tax
collector. I caught him on the road this morning
trying to get into the village. And I said, if I take
him down here and I give him to anybody else, he'll
just be back down here. They said, well, we're
going to be in the sheriff for a couple of weeks, so
we'll talk to him. Well, they talked to him. They
hooked him up
to a telephone. And the guy sang like a canary. Got
all the information they wanted to out of him.
cleaned that guy up, they put him in a suit, and took
him into town and turned him over to the district
check. Then they went out and got everybody that he
had put on their list and got everyone. And I never
saw that tax collector again. And I felt good about
doing that because
he wasn't out there taking the people's money from
him. wasn't threatening him about to be seen. Now,
I know somebody else took his place, but he wasn't
there. And I thanked him for it. I thought
it was a good unit. Well, what did you think of the
Korean forces and the Australian and the, quote,
allies, unquote? Well, the Koreans,
as far as fighting them, now let me just tell you,
The Koreans did everything in South Vietnam that
we taught them how to do in Korea as far as building
fire bases, how high the berm had to be, what type of
Constantino wire you had to put out, what your
firing positions were. And you go over there, and
they had two divisions there that I remember. And
to go up to An Cay from Quy Nhon, you had to go right
past a rock division fire base. They had one strand
of bob wire. around their outer berm. One strand of
bottom wire. And they had little signs out there
saying, please attack us. And you know what? They
never got mortared. They never got sniped at or
nothing. You go to the next fire base down the road,
which is an American fire base, there must have
been thousands of yards of concertina wire,
claymore mines, and just everything in the world,
and they get picked on all day long. So it didn't
matter what the American forces thought about the
Koreans in South Vietnam. What mattered was how
the North Vietnamese and the B.C. thought about
the Koreans. And they didn't fool with them. The
Koreans had to go out and beg the B.C. to fight. They
were good soldiers. They were good soldiers.
Probably the only mistake that we made is
Lieutenant Calley and some of our lieutenants
went to Vietnam a couple of weeks earlier. And they
worked with the Korean division. And so when the
American troops got there and Cali took over his
platoon again and Captain Medina's coming, he
wanted them all to be like the rocks. You have to
understand the Oriental mind. And I don't think
any white man will ever understand the Oriental
mind. It's a different concept of operation
completely.
You know, MacArthur was one of the first guys that
said, don't get involved in a war on the Asian
landmass. And why we continue to do that after we
saw the French and the Chinese and everybody else
there, you know, is beyond me.
Let me put in here at this time, in case we run out of
film, that the American soldier on the average in
South Vietnam was a dedicated soldier. I feel
that, and I guess it's because I had to feel that way
about it. Otherwise, the two years and the 20 years
that I spent in the military would be wasted
psychologically. It would probably screw my
brain up pretty bad. I don't have any... negative
things about Vietnam, like Agent Orange or all
this other crap that some of these people cop out
with. And I think that's what it is, is a cop out. The
second time I went to South Vietnam, it was evident
to me that the American leaders and the American
people were not going to let us win the war. We were
not going to be allowed to fight to win. That's the
reason they pulled us back to the fire bases and the
bridges and say, you can operate within 1,500
meters of this road, but don't get 1,600 meters
away from the road. Those were the kind of units
that you had in South Vietnam. And this is getting
back to the question that you asked me about drugs.
You take all these soldiers and you put them in one
spot for a year and say, you can't move. And the only
time you're going to move off this bridge is when
you go on R&R. for seven days somewhere out of
country. Now you take a highly trained fighting
guy that has gone through booby trap warfare and
all this other crap back here in the States so he can
stay alive when he gets to South Vietnam, and he
never gets to utilize any of that training. The
guy's bored to death. He sits there, and you can
only shoot so many rounds at tin cans and stuff like
that, you know, around your perimeter, around
your bunker, and stuff like that. And you get bored
to death. All these guys, a lot of them, would
either start drinking liquor or they'd start
smoking pot or they'd mainline heroin. And that's
when the drug scene really got bad in Vietnam. You
just didn't take guys out into the bush and fight
the VC at their own game while they're high on
drugs. And the guys knew that. So if they smoked pot
at all, It was back at the fire base. You didn't do it
out there where you were going to run into somebody
who was going to try to kill you. So the drug scene
would be bad from 70 on until we got completely out
of South Vietnam. I left South Vietnam in
September of 1971. Never went back. And I was
teaching Russian doctrine at West Point in 1975.
in the fall of Saigon. And there were a lot of guys in
that department that just sat there and cried
because of all the waste. Fifty-four, fifty-five
thousand guys. A lot of them were friends. Not to
mention all the money and weapons and stuff that we
left there for these little idiots to run around
Southeast Asia with. You know, we didn't blow
everything up when we come out of there. So I guess
we all determined that while we were there, we did
the best that we could.
And then after it was all over with, it was just part
of your past and you put it behind you and you go
ahead and drive on and get ready for the next one. Do
you think we could have won the war? We could have
kicked ass and took names over there so easy. We
could have put the 2nd Armored Division on Highway
1 We could have put the 1st Armored Division on
Highway 19 and we could have told them to meet us in
Hanoi in two weeks and we'd have won the war. We
weren't supposed to win the war.
The way I look at it now. Why? I don't know why. I wish
I did and I wish I could really get all the people
that were responsible for it in the same room and so
I could nuke them. And he thinks responsible for
it. Well, the American leadership, for one thing,
was responsible for it. Kennedy, basically, I
think, had the right idea by putting it back.
Trying to help the people win their own war. Then it
would have meant something. When they started
escalating and putting American GIs in there, and
we took over the role of the South Vietnamese Army,
that's when we made our mistake. We could have went
in there and defended the airfields and stuff like
that, and let the South Vietnam's Army be trained
and be equipped by us and fight their war, then it
would have been a civil war, okay? We went in there
and tried to intervene, and it was no longer just a
North Vietnamese, South Vietnamese civil war. It
became a world situation. The Russians were
supplying the North Vietnamese. We were
supplying the South Vietnamese. They had Russian
advisors. They had American advisors in
Australia and anybody else that was supposed to be
in the CTO to help us. And we got overcommitted in
something that
we probably just shouldn't have
even been there. Why do you think we got involved in
the first place? To stop communism. So do you
believe Truman's theory? Which is? The domino
theory, if one... Yeah, I think one of these days
that if we don't do something about South America,
Nicaragua and down in that part of the country,
that something will likely happen like this movie
that came out several years ago called The Red
Dawn, where they invaded through the Mexican area
and through Washington State. And then you end up
fighting on your own country, in your own country,
and you fight a guerrilla war. Because everybody
else around you has finally been cut off. And all
the fingers are cut off, and now the hand doesn't
operate. And I agree with that theory. And there's
a solution to it. Okay? We could have stopped
communism in South Vietnam. We could have won the
war. We won a lot of the fights. You know, a lot of the
battles. The press were the ones that made the Tet
Offensive a big defeat for American
soldiers. For two weeks, they escalated the war.
And in two weeks, we had drove them all back. We had
killed maybe 50,000-something Little BC in NVA
and regained all the territory that we had lost, if
we lost any at all. But the press made it a big defeat
and a big psychological victory for the BC. Why do
you think the press is allowed such a free hand? I
don't know. But... And you don't want to get me
started talking about the press because I think
they're all a bunch of communist pinko pigs. Okay.
That's not a press question. All right, you had
said... made some comments about the National
Guard. Do you think they should have been brought
over to fight? I don't see why. I don't see any need
for the National Guard to be called up unless it's
the last. You know, to me, the National Guard is
going to be here to defend the homeland. If the
regular army can't take care of something
someplace else, then you call up the National
Guard and the Army Reserve, and then you get them
involved in it. I realize that there are
specialized units, like special forces, some Air
Force units, fighter jobs, and stuff like that,
that you may need to infuse into the total program.
But to nationalize the National Guard, to go
overseas to fight in South Vietnam, to me, was
stupid. I don't think they were needed. I really
don't. There were enough original army units
around that could have taken care of the situation
if they would have been allowed to fight the way
that we were trained and not to do this and don't do
that and oh, you can't do this. If we would have
fought in South Vietnam like they fought World War
II and World War I, we wouldn't. How long do you
think it would have taken them? I don't know. I
don't think it would have took very long. You would
have had a lot of holdouts that would have been in
the mountains and had guerrilla warfare. But you
can fight guerrilla warfare with
counterinsurgency. You go in and you take care of
the guerrillas. You don't go in and settle down in a
village and wait for them. You move into their area
and you snipe at them and you ambush them and you
take care of them and you fight the way they fight.
And eventually, you kill them all. You don't get
rid of the guerrilla fighter by going in and
assaulting his women or burning down his village
or things like that because every time you do
something like that, for every one guerrilla that
you kill, you've got ten more that's willing to
join their army because you've hurt their family,
you've burned up their hooch, you've destroyed
their food and things like that. But you can kill
off the guerrillas. Why do you think, or do you
think we use conventional warfare tactics
against an army or the B.C. that was so much
guerrilla warfare? I think basically your North
Vietnamese army was conventional, and I think
your B.C. were the guerrillas. And I think if we
would have operated the same way, when we first got
into South Vietnam, they said, oh, well, the
knight belongs to Charlie. Well, hell, the knight
didn't belong to Charlie. The knight belonged to
whoever went out there and took it. When we started
our night ambushes and we started moving at night
and engaging the VC at night, they quit moving
around. You know, you isolate them into certain
areas. And if you don't interdict trails 24 hours a
day, and sometime during that day, Charlie's
going to figure out what your sequence is and he's
going to move. But if you keep interdicting
everything and you fight them when they fight,
you're killing them.
What did y'all do when the VC didn't want to fight or
the NBA didn't want to fight, just didn't? We'd go
look
for them. We'd pick out areas that had a lot of, we'd
get a lot of intel out of it. You know, you had five
categories of intelligence. The number one
source was American ice, salt. The number five
was... Some rice farmers we heard about said he saw
so-and-so over here. You know, that was the
difference between the two. So that's when they
started sending out a lot of long-range patrols.
And that's when guys started going into the jungle
and getting back in there and sneaking people and
finding them, you know, where they were. That's
when you got your tunnel rats that started going
into your tunnels and everything and going down
and blowing up their holes and stuff. somewhere
they couldn't use them, and then they had to come
out and build. The defoliation program with Agent
Orange. You know, for what it was supposed to do,
you know, kill all the trees and everything so you
could see stuff walking around, it was great, but
it was killing everybody else it touched, too. You
know, you've got a lot of guys out here that say that
they breathed it or whatever it is, and now their
kids have got cancer. I don't know if any of that
stuff is true or not. I don't know if it's a bunch of
guys just trying to get some more insurance or
anything. Frankly, if they get it, I think they got
it coming to them because they were there. But I
don't think that was the way to fight the war. We had
enough guys that were trained to fight as
guerrilla warfare people. We could have, if
nothing else, just flooded special forces people
all over the country and trained the mountain
yards. The mountain yards hated the Vietnamese.
They didn't care if it was north or south. If they
were Vietnamese, they'd like to kill them. You
know, we could have trained all the mountain yards
in South Vietnam, and they could have took over the
country. What is it?
Politics. And I don't know enough about politics
to talk about them, but I can tell you, somebody
made wrong decisions to back their own people. How
about General Key? Where's he at right now? New
Mexico? Living high off the hog? I know he's in the
United States someplace. He was the prime
minister of South Vietnam. Where does he get all
this money? What other credibility did the guy
have except he was an Air Force general that we had
trained, and he ran their Air Force for them, and
then when we threw out them and his brother... He
took over the government. Where'd he get all his
money to live high on the hog out here in New Mexico
or California? You think some of it came from all
that stuff that was supposed to go to the buildings
for the classification that didn't make it? I'd
say so. I'd say so.
Matter of fact, if it wouldn't be so bold, I'd say
I'd stake my life
on it.
About
Jim and his brother, do you think we assassinated
him? We did? No, we didn't. The South Vietnamese
Army did. You think we helped set it up?
I don't know. I would say so. Why? Just by the way
that things ran in South Vietnam. I think the CIA
had their fingers in every little dirty thing over
there. And if they didn't, then Navy intelligence
or Army intelligence or somebody knew what
happened. And they either knew it was going to
happen and could have prevented it, or they
participated in it. You think this is the only
case? No, no. I'm sure there was a lot of
that. You've got to understand now that I was just
Staff Sergeant E6, And I spent 11 months and 16 days
in the bush until I hit the second evac hospital and
got med evac'd. Okay? I stayed out in the field. My
bag wasn't politics. It was staying alive and
doing my job. And I didn't get into the pot smoking
or the beer drinking or anything else. The only
time I drank beer is when I went back to Hawaii on my
own.
When did you get involved
with the Special Forces? Well, I got a little tied
up with a guy named Major Hudson that I mentioned
before. He was with Charlie 75th Range. And did
some insurgent work with him because I was the
operation sergeant for the camp, or the camp
squadron that I was in. helicopter resources that
were available was through our cabinets. Well
after being there for about six months I was
getting bored sitting around answering radios
and stuff like that so I started flying and doing
some insurgents and stuff with the retrieve
commander of the helicopter unit and got to know
Major Hudson pretty good and then started doing
some penetration work with him as a team leader and
operation sergeant for him. you know, just sort of
eased into it. It wasn't hard. All you had to do was
be dumb enough to volunteer for different things,
and people always accept you, you know. I did that
kind of work for about six months, and then the
squadron commander called me into his office. I
was getting ready to rotate back, and I had an
assignment at Fort Hood, Texas, Lord have mercy.
And I would have extended another year in Vietnam
to stay out in Texas. And he said, how would you like
to go to West Point? And I said, don't you think I'm a
little old to go to West Point? And he says, no, you
idiot, as an instructor, not a cadet. Because I was
already an E-7 and was on the E-8 list.
I said, well, I said, where's it at? And I didn't
know anything about West Point. I knew that's
where they had lieutenants come out of West Point,
someplace in New York, and it's on the Hudson River
and everything. And he talked to me about it, and he
said, well, the armored branch at West Point is
looking for a noncommissioned officer to come up
there and be an instructor. And I said, I'd like to
hear what he does. And I said, hell, I'll do it. So I
got out of country two days early because they
wanted me to spend a couple of weeks with the
armored sergeant that was already at West Point. I
had a little overlap there between us so I could
learn the job real good from him before he DD'd out
of the area. And I left Vietnam in September of 71
and went to West Point and I stayed there for five
years. I took the cadets down to Fort Knox every
summer. I taught your basic military science
classes small unit tactics, terrain
interpretation, main navigation. The last two
years I was there, I got into Russian doctrine and
started teaching some junior and senior classes
in Russian. I knew a lot about the Russian tactics.
And then from there, I went to 3rd Squadron, 2nd
Camp in Germany, in a little town called Amberg. I
was 1st Sergeant for K Troop. And I ran the border
for three years. and really enjoy it. The same
colonel came through on an IG inspection tour
right before I got ready to be released out of
Germany and said, how'd you like to go back to West
Point? And I said, well, you know, that's probably
one of the best tours I've ever had. I said, I'd like
to go back there. So in 78, October 78, my family and
I went back to West Point. Except this time we were
living on Sergeant Major's Road. And these were
homes that were built in the late 1800s, and they
were beautiful, and they had big fireplaces, and
the ceilings were 11 foot high. And I said, finally
it arrived. You know, I finally made it. And I came
out on the sergeant major's list. I was supposed to
go to Bliss, the sergeant major's academy. And I
said, whoa, I better call and find out where I'm
going to go when I get out of the sergeant major's
academy. because I was due to be in there in
January, and this is October. So I called DA and I
said, hey, Phil, I said, where am I supposed to go
when I graduate from Sergeant Major's Academy? He
said, well, you're supposed to go to Germany. I
said, I just came back from Germany. He says, I
know, but he says, well, you'll do six months at the
Sergeant Major's Academy. We'll leave you there
six months as an instructor, and then you can go
back to... You know, you'll have about another six
months to wait before you get your sergeant major
strike. So we'll put you in a unit where we've got a
sergeant major that's getting ready to rotate in
six months, and then you just step right into his
position. I was tickled to death. I loved Europe.
Because every year we'd take 20 days, and we'd just
travel all over Europe and camp out and just do what
we wanted to do. I went home that evening and I said,
guess what? I'm on the sergeant major's list and
we're going to do six months at Fort Bliss and then
six months there as an instructor. And then we're
going back to Germany.
I ain't going back to Germany. And I said, well, I'm
not going back to Germany myself because if I go by
myself, then that's two years that I have to do by
myself and my family from the States. So I called DA
the next day and I said, hey, what are my options?
And he said, you've got two choices. He says, you
can go back to Germany when you get out and start a
major academy, or you can retire. Well, he upset
me. And I said, well, I'm going to take my models and
I'm going home. And I retired.
I've regretted it ever since. I should have stayed
in. I have 28 years in now. I'd be some fat old sard
maker someplace in Europe in a guest house
drinking cold beer and smoking a cigar.
What did you see happening in Vietnam while you
were stateside between your tours? Hmm. Didn't
really pay that much attention to it. I just
watched the news every day and tried to keep up with
some of the old units that I was in. I think it
became... I think after the initial Tet Offensive
and it started settling down that things in
Vietnam started changing from what a military man
would consider okay to bad because you had to start
asking for permissions to fire. I think the
involvement in South Vietnam changed after the
Tet Offensive because they thought that... You
know, that American soldier got beaten bad during
the Tet Offensive, and that wasn't the case at all.
I think it was just a matter of bad publicity as far
as the military was concerned. And I think people
were just tired of it, didn't want us there, and it
was time to either finish it up or get out. What did
you see happen with the United States government
while you were stateside?
Well, I think more and more politicians were
listening to their constituents and they were
starting to turn the screws in different ways
politically to get the troops out of South
Vietnam. I don't know. It was just, uh, Everybody
at first was on the bandwagon and then rapidly
started jumping off of it because they could see
that it really wasn't what the public wanted. I
think it was just a difficult situation for
political figures. They didn't know which way to
jump. They couldn't make a decision. And that was
one of the reasons why the military figures in
South Vietnam were not allowed to win the war. Win
the battles, but don't win the war. And there was a
lot of pressure on people to turn everything back
over to the South Vietnamese.
Why do you think the government had this attitude
of, okay, we'll let you in the bowels, but we won't
let you in the war? Why do you think they didn't want
to go in and win? Well, you know, it started out at
first with just advisors, and then we built up a
little bit because of the Gulf of Tonkin incident,
and U.S. ships were fired on. and we'll send the
Marines in and protect the air bases. And then it
just sort of got escalated, and it got away from
them. And I don't know if it was because there were
general officers in South Vietnam saying, hey,
we've got to have this, we've got to have this,
we've got to have this. And they just kept trying to
build it up because, hey, you know, it's great.
It's the only war we've got. We might as well make
the most of it. Thank God most military men don't
think that way. There are some that do. But I would
hopefully think that most of them don't. I think if
you talk to most military men, they'll tell you
that they're the first ones that really don't want
to fight. And that is if they've seen any fighting
at all. And I think over the, as it continued, they
realized that it had gotten out of hand, and they
were trying to do something about it, and they
didn't know how to do it. It was like they'd got it
all started, Now where are we going with it and how
are we going to get out of it and still save face and
still try to accomplish the things that we set out
to do? The first thing was to prevent the takeover
of South Vietnam from the communists. Was it
really communists or was it just a revolution
between North Vietnam and South Vietnam? I guess
it would have been okay if Chinese weapons and
Russian weapons and stuff like that hadn't got
involved, and then we hadn't got involved, and we
just let them fight on our own. But other people got
involved, so we got involved too. It's always a lot
better to fight a war on somebody else's ground
than fight it on yours. Okay, when you went back for
your second tour, were you involved in any way with
the Cambodian invasion in 1972? I sat in Saigon for
31 days while the invasion of Cambodia was going
on. The only indirect way that I got involved with
the Cambodian invasion was that we had done some
recon in the Parrot Peak area about four months
before the invasion. And that was the only way. I
didn't get directly involved with the invasion of
Cambodia other than to do some recon. What do you
think? President Nixon was right in invading
Cambodia and extending the war beyond Vietnam, or
do you think it was a bad move? I think it was a couple
years too late. It wasn't only Cambodia that
the North Vietnamese... had supply dumps and
everything. If we were going to invade Cambodia,
why didn't we do Cambodia, Laos, and why didn't we
do North Vietnam? Why didn't we do it all?
I think he was talked into doing it high-ranking
military officers from the South Vietnamese
government, plus us, to push that back. Or maybe
the South Vietnamese told him that, hey, if you'll
take care of these things, then when you start your
withdrawal, then we can take care of everything
else on our own. I don't know. I know that Cambodia
had a lot of storage areas. I think it was a good
move. militarily to go in and knock out supply
dumps and destroy troops where they no longer had a
sanctuary where they could they could run to and
then stick their noses and their tongues out at you
you know back across the river and say nanny nanny
boo boo you can't come and get me you know uh when you
find a situation like this or you you fight these
kind of battles You know, you're limited in what
you can do if the other guy can just duck back across
the border. It was the same thing with the 38th
Parallel or whatever it was at the Yalu River in
Korea. You know, for their MiGs to dash back across
the Yalu River and us not being able to pursue them
was stupid. You know, they can come down south all
they wanted to and shoot everything up and dash
back across the river, and we was... either
getting guys busted or slapped the wrist or sent
them back to Japan just because they couldn't go
back across the river, and they were severely
punished if they did do that. And for us to make
arbitrary penetrations across into Cambodia or
Laos to chase some gooks that have been shooting at
us all day long, and now it's nighttime and they
want to go camp out across the river, you know,
that's stupid. If you're going to fight a war, then
fight it. And that's one of the reasons why we
couldn't, you know, you can win the battles, but
you can't win the war because you're so limited
because of political situations that dictate to
you on how you're going to fight your enemy. All
right. Earlier you said when you were in Tet that in
the combat zone and in the fire zone you didn't have
to call and ask. You know, you knew you could fight.
Did this having to call and request to get in the
firefight occurred while you were there or had it
occurred while you were stateside? No, that
started when I came back in the end of 1968 there was
a lot of changes that took place over there I guess
because when I got back over in country in 1970 it
was different. A lot of your major units were
standing down like the 4th Infantry Division was
getting ready to break up and come back home. And
they were infusing a lot of their troops into units
that were going to stay. So they were already
starting their withdrawal.
They didn't go out and really do search and destroy
missions anymore.
They stayed pretty close to the highways and just
seemed like they didn't want to fight. And the
American soldiers didn't want to fight. And one of
the things that we had to do in the Anke area there
for quite a while is we had to call up the district
advisor and say, hey, we're in this area. We see
people carrying weapons, and they're going this
way. Can we engage them? We had it before in 68. If
you saw people wearing black pajamas carrying
weapons... then they were the enemy. Now, in 1970,
we don't know who they are. We got to call and get
permission to engage them. Now, if they turned
around and engaged us, then we could engage them.
So I guess there were a lot of American units that
got engaged first, and then they engaged the
enemy. It was, you know, question this, question
that.
It was a different thing. The two years changed the
thing in South Vietnam. What happened there while
I was gone, I don't know. I was comfortable being a
military man in 1967 and 68 when I was in Vietnam.
And I was a good soldier. And I was a good soldier in
1970 and 71. And I did basically the same things
once I got back into it again. But the rules of
engagement had changed, and the feeling of the
military in South Vietnam, U.S. and Arvin, had
changed. And it was just, you couldn't really put
your finger on it, but you could feel it. It was
finally like somebody had realized, hey, we got us
a no-win situation here. You know? We're not.
We're winning the fights, and we're getting our
body count, and we're doing this and we're doing
that, and we're still losing guys. Where's the
final objective? People were starting to
realize, what's the final objective? We're not
going to be allowed to win this thing. And I think a
lot of your senior NCOs and your senior officers
were starting to realize that. So what they were
trying to do is protect... and really not engage.
Because if you don't engage the enemy, then you
don't get shot at and you don't get people hurt.
How were you treated, first of all, when you came
home in 68? Did you come home as a unit, as y'all had
went over there as a unit, or did you come back as an
individual? I was medevaced, so I came back on a
hospital plane. And of course, when we landed in
San Francisco, we didn't go through the normal
airport or anything like that. We went into a
military base there in San Francisco. We stayed on
military aircraft when I got to Martin Army
Hospital in Fort Hood. So I didn't see a bunch of
civilians. I stayed around. I was hooked up
completely with the military.
Never had much to do with civilians as far as the 20
years that I spent in the military.
I heard a lot of guys say that when they come home
that they got spit on and they had stuff thrown at
them and things like that. I never had anything
like that happen to me.
I had some in-laws and some cousins and stuff like
that ask me what I thought about the involvement of
South Vietnam. course being pro-military like I
was I just told him what I thought used to in the
military you could put your uniform on and go
downtown and people would slap you on the back and
and the military guy was proud to wear his uniform
you can get you wearing a uniform walking into a
cafe when I went into the military would get you a
free cup of coffee because that's what people
thought about veterans and people that served in
the armed forces. Nowadays, I think it's a very
rare thing, unless you're around a military base,
that you'll see guys in uniform used to it was a
regulation that when you travel by civilian
airline you had to travel with your uniform on if
you were military now they don't care they let you
go anywhere you want to in civilian clothes as long
as you report into duty with your uniform on so to me
that's wrong i think if you're in the military you
ought to wear your uniform when you travel I don't
care if the civilian public like it or not. That's
an obligation that you owe yourself and the
military because you're there with them. I don't
know. I think it's a sad situation because I think
the civilian people ought to sit back and think all
through history. And I don't care which war
they're talking about. I don't care if it's Korea.
I don't care if it was Chesty Puller down in Havana,
Cuba in the early 1900s. Think where the United
States of America would be today if you didn't have
veterans.
What do you think the civilian population was
thinking while, especially after Tet, while you
were in Vietnam? What was their attitude? Well, I
don't know what they were thinking, and quite
frankly, I didn't care. Things were so hot and
heavy and busy, we really didn't think about what
the civilians were doing. After a while, that was
about the same time that Jane Fonda started all her
crap, and Joan Baez and some of these other people.
And the only comments that you'd have are, gee, I'd
like to see her for just a few minutes. or wish she
was here on receiving into some of this crap.
And I'd like for her to be here so I could explain to
her why we're in this country. You know, she talks
about the bombing of North Vietnam, but she never
walked through a village in South Vietnam and saw
little kids with legs missing or arms missing or
walked into a village right after the VC had been
there and taken care of the village chief and his
kids and the teachers and stuff like that. She
never done that. She never had the opportunity to
do that. I just wish that I could have shown all that
to her.
Um, What do you think the military needs to learn
from Vietnam? One of the first things that we knew
before we even went into South Vietnam, don't get
involved in a war on an Asian land mass.
I guess three reasons. One is it costs too much
money. It's not politically sound. And if you
don't have the complete backing of the country,
you're going to lose men for no reason because
you're not going to win. those three things and
it's unfortunate because they're
good fighters they've been at it all their lives
you know but they can be beat if it came to that they
could be beat and it doesn't have to be done with
nuclear weapons it can be done with conventional
warfare but if the one thing that I would tell the
government of the United States, that if you're
going to commit American soldiers to do
something, don't tie their hands behind their
back and tell them that you want them to win and then
stand back and let them win.
Okay. You talked about the bombing of North
Vietnam, Bowling Thunder. Do you think it was
effective?
Yeah, I think to an extent a lot of it was effective.
I think there was a lot of misdirected targets. I
think there was a lot of bombing raids that didn't
hit anything because they were afraid to hit
civilian areas.
And You know, when you do bombing on that scale,
then you're gonna have to accept a certain amount
of civilian casualties.